Marius: Hello!
Nicolas Consigny: Lower, loop.
Tim Beiko: Hello.
Tim Beiko: okay, wait another minute, and then it's started.
Tim Beiko: And yeah, Marius, your comment we can chat about those
Tim Beiko: do you mean and sorry. Did you mean Pablo's pr Marius.
Marius: No, I mean the heaps that we have on definite one.
Tim Beiko: Yeah. But do you mean the is it
Tim Beiko: related to this? Pr, I just posted?
Tim Beiko: If not, it's it's fine as well, if not, but I just wanted to make sure.
Marius: It's not related to this.
Tim Beiko: Okay? So okay, let me tweak the agenda.
Tim Beiko: Okay? Josh, you want to move us over to the live stream.
Josh Davis: Here you are, live.
Tim Beiko: Okay, thank you. Welcome to acde number 2 13.
Tim Beiko: I've posted a link to the agenda in the chat here.
Tim Beiko: couple of things to discuss today. So on the Fussaka front. There are a few things that came out of the testing call that
Tim Beiko: we should touch on so around the gas limit, and then some bon xp questions. Then for the finalization of the scope we discussed
Tim Beiko: making some changes to rip 7, 2, 1, 2, last call which are in progress, and then wanted to finalize the set of list. The set of eips for that 2. So do those. And then
Tim Beiko: continuing from last week we started discussing potential headliners for Amsterdam. So there were a few El related ones that had been proposed
Tim Beiko: that we we should cover there are also other eips that have started to be proposed, I think.
Tim Beiko: We probably shouldn't take
Tim Beiko: time on the call to discuss them unless anyone feels very strongly about it. But it's probably best to to stay focused on the the actual fork headliners for now
Tim Beiko: And then, just as a heads up as well the next week, because of the in person meetings we'll cancel the calls, and I will be out in 2 weeks, and Onstar will be taking over for Acbe
Tim Beiko: but just to kick things off. So on acd Monday there was a discussion about raising the gas limit,
Tim Beiko: and and kind of testing it on 60 million on Hoodie, and then moving to Mainnet and after that I know there's some follow up conversations about like what the right approach should be to actually increase it? And are there things we want to see or or like potential blockers there? So if someone might want to recap kind of the
Tim Beiko: the outcome. That discussion, and what the open questions were about, like actually moving forward with this on Mainnet.
Parithosh Jayanthi: Yeah, I can give a brief update. So on Monday, on Acd, we asked client teams if they saw any other blockers before we started to signal raising the gas limit on
Parithosh Jayanthi: on Mainnet for 60 million.
Parithosh Jayanthi: However, I mean in the last couple of days. I think once we started planning for Bell interrupt. We realized that we're going to be doing a lot of work on gas limit performance testing, anyway. So in in my opinion, we probably should wait to make a decision until that track is done, and by the end of next week we'll have a better idea about what our scaling limits are what? We? We would have a few more eyes from from
Parithosh Jayanthi: on the gas limit, from a security perspective, and so on, and then probably the acdt. The week after we can make a call on how we want to increase the gas limit.
Tim Beiko: And there's a question in the chat. Yeah, about
Tim Beiko: the intention around either jumping to 60 million straights or having some intermediate steps so I don't know if
Tim Beiko: yeah, is that basically what we're hoping to figure out in the next week or so.
Parithosh Jayanthi: Yeah, I think that would be one of the discussion points. I don't really see any problem with doing intermediate steps other than coordination overhead. I think it takes us quite a bit of time to
Parithosh Jayanthi: go through the gas limit increase process. So yeah, I think we should try to prevent as many steps as possible, but at the same time not have the steps too granular.
Tim Beiko: Thanks.
Tim Beiko: Anyone else. Have thoughts, comments on this.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, Micah.
Micah Zoltu: So the testing team appears to have done a great job of digging into digging very deeply into whether or not stakers will run into problems with the high gas limit which I think again, I want to
Micah Zoltu: acknowledge that excellent work. But I still haven't seen any research or discussion into how the gas limit affects other participants in the ethereum network. It seems everybody's focused on stakers and builders, and no one has even talked about Rpc. Providers, or, even more importantly, in my opinion, people who are running their own local Rpc. Clients, and how this affects them. I think
Micah Zoltu: the
Micah Zoltu: storage issue affects those people far more than affects people who are paid providers, and these are end users who, you know, hopefully, are running ethereum on their home computers. I've talked to a handful of people just ethereum developers across the ecosystem over the last few weeks.
Micah Zoltu: and there seems to be a lot of divergence in whether or not. We care whether people can run ethereum at home. There's some people, you know. Dankratt is very forward with this, and I very much appreciate how candid he is where he says, you know, he doesn't think that
Micah Zoltu: ethereum needs to be a tool that people can run on their computers at home, and that's acceptable. And there are other people in the developer community who seem to think that they should be able to run clients on home computers. And so it seems like there is a
Micah Zoltu: a mismatch between. Whether who we're targeting? Do we care? The question I would like to see answered very clearly is, does do the ethereum core devs. And as a group
Micah Zoltu: want people to be able to run ethereum at home on their just home computers? Or is that something that we're no longer targeting. It used to be a target back in the day.
Micah Zoltu: And there's again some subset that don't think it's a target anymore. And these gas limit changes will affect that. And so I would just like to see more discussion and research into how this affects people. Besides stakers and block builders.
Tim Beiko: So I guess like, yes, there's a there's a difference between
Tim Beiko: stakers. Block builders are just like node operators who want to validate the chain running at home versus running a full on Rpc service, which is by definition, like resource, more resource, intensive.
Tim Beiko: we had, I don't know. Like, yeah, I was gonna post in the chat. We have this eip that attempted to define some of these constraints eip 7, 8 70 and I think throughout this discussion, like A did not come up, that, like we should optimize for home. Rpc providers,
Tim Beiko: and so I I feel like this is probably the right
Tim Beiko: like I don't know distillation in a way of the opinion like we should serve like people running their local node. Obviously, you need to be able to make local Rpc calls to that node. But I think when you start to go into like running a kind of high usage
Tim Beiko: endpoints that's potentially used by others that feels like
Tim Beiko: like like that that feels like a comp like a qualitatively different thing.
Micah Zoltu: Yes, it definitely does the we.
Micah Zoltu: the there's there's 3 or 4 different demographics, right? You've got the block builders you've got, which.
Micah Zoltu: based on the research roadmap sounds like block builders are expecting to be super high end data center type hardware, you know, doing zk proofs. Yada, Yada, Yada, you have validators. Who are. We still want to support home quote unquote home stakers. These are people who, you know, can put a lot of money into building machines and whatnot. And they have hardware, but maybe not a data center. And then you have Rpc providers again, probably data centers. And the the last group is the group. Again. It used to be a group of people who
Micah Zoltu: existed and dominated the ethereum ecosystem and have basically disappeared as anchor had mentioned in chat here, which is people who just run ethereum on their home computers. They do not buy extra hardware. They do not go to the store. They do not.
Tim Beiko: Right.
Micah Zoltu: Spend a lot of time thinking about ethereum. They just double, click an installer, run it and it runs in the background. Baysu has a thing in their client where you can run a flat database. This is a somewhat trusted system, though it could be made trustless with some additional R&D, and this runs in, I think they said 50 or sorry. 80 GB ish right now for the full state.
Micah Zoltu: and so in under 100 GB. You can run an ethereum node today, and with additional R&D work from ethereum core devs. We could make that possible in a trustless way
Micah Zoltu: as we increase the gas limit that increases the rate at which that 80 GB grows. Now, we're not talking about 80 GB plus 3 GB a month. We're talking about 80 GB plus 6 GB a month, and that adds up real quick. And so yes, 3 GB a month of state growth. You're looking at one or 2 TB is not much. When you're looking at 80 GB, it's a very significant increase. And so that's the group that
Micah Zoltu: yeah, I really feel like, you know, if we're going to just cut them out, we need to make that clear that we're doing that.
Tim Beiko: I do think like, yes, I do think this is kind of clear in 78 70, like, basically, this is a effectively like, just like a non staking
Tim Beiko: like node and like, or like a full node, basically like and I think it's been
Tim Beiko: pretty clear in the past few years. That like, yeah, the the Median way to run this requires extra hardware. It should be consumer grade hardware. And it should be basically, you know, not
Tim Beiko: like, like, I'm not out of reach for people to do this, but I don't think. I guess I think we've passed the point of saying.
Tim Beiko: we can optimize this for effectively, you know, like a couple of 100 gigs of storage and nothing else.
Tim Beiko: some client implementations might be able to help with this. But
Tim Beiko: but yeah, like, it's, it's definitely not like the median.
Tim Beiko: yeah, the the median approach.
Tim Beiko: I guess. Yeah. Okay, odds are. And then, yeah, let's do that.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Yeah, I just wanted to say that, like, I think one way in which maybe I think many people at least have expressed in the past. The intention to change a little bit. How we do things in ethereum is maybe that we want to still like continue to take these concerns very seriously, because obviously this is crucial to the core of ethereum that we actually get this right kind of this trade-off and really understand the costs of scaling, and when that is acceptable and when it isn't, but that we stop doing it. The way where we always basically 1st get blocked on like
Ansgar Dietrichs: 7 rounds of conversations before we have exact agreement, and only then make any moves, because then, in the meantime, the experience for actual users is just really really bad. So I, personally would just say that the the basically the process here of saying over the next 2 weeks, with the in person, events and everything. We basically make initial decisions for the short term. And we're only talking about at most, 1 point, something X increase right? Like 60 million is not even double today's level
Ansgar Dietrichs: and then going forward, we will have a process. And I think, Mike, I'm happy to to reach out and and have you been involved in this, where we we will also, over time, become more precise in the, in distinguishing between different types of nodes, including Rpc. Notes explicitly, so that we actually have a fundamental basis. And then we can still have the conversation
Ansgar Dietrichs: which assumptions to use. There was not used there. But I think, basically, for now we should still move forward with this process and not be blocked for 6 months while we have that discussion.
Tim Beiko: It's Dunker.
Dankrad Feist: Yeah, I mean, I think, like, when I hear these discussions, I often just feel like it's really disconnected from reality, like, I mean, I think, like
Dankrad Feist: the we're still thinking about ethereum as if it were 2050. And it's like people want to run like a home like this this node at home that has all these properties. But, like the Median ethereum user now, is so far away from that that's pretending that we still get the same
Dankrad Feist: like we still operate in the same space and still get the same benefits, is like
Dankrad Feist: not very reasonable to me, like, I think, like in practice, we, we know exactly like most of us know exactly what normal ethereum users do, and yet we keep designing for something completely different. And I think, like we need to move away from that and like, be like, well, this is what is really happening. And like.
Dankrad Feist: we want to get the Median ethereum users. The best properties that we can, rather than like a small set of like people who like
Dankrad Feist: do something very different from that.
lightclient: Lukesh.
Łukasz Rozmej: So I'm somewhere in the middle. So I agree with that we should be able to run ethereum nodes on standard consumer hardware, and we can.
Łukasz Rozmej: And if you need to buy a SSD. If you want the full history from Genesis.
Łukasz Rozmej: it's also fine, and if you need some decent connection to keep up with the network. And it's also fine. If as long as it's reasonable and available in a in a lot of locations, it's
Łukasz Rozmej: so. Yeah, I don't see a problem. You can build blocks with Nevermind and not only Nevermind, probably a few 100 Megabogas blocks. You can process them. You can store them relatively easily with newer architectures like Arygon free. Even archive node
Łukasz Rozmej: is somewhat reasonable, but it's also fine for us to say if you want that. By a SSD, right? It's technical limitation. We would love not to have that. But it's fine. I do agree that we should maybe focus a bit more on eap 4 force, and having it post merge pruning of that
Łukasz Rozmej: to to help with that. But that's about it.
Tim Beiko: Thanks. So I guess,
Tim Beiko: like, yeah. The the main thing I wanted to revisit today was like, yeah, whether we were okay, just
Tim Beiko: whether we were okay, just moving forward with 60 million on main net as of now, it does seem like there's more data that we wanna collect, at least in the next couple of weeks, we should we should figure out the like, yeah.
Tim Beiko: what what? What like the the requirements are, whether we want to do a 1 off like bump to 60 million, or to be more gradual. And I expect in like
Tim Beiko: 2 weeks or so we'll we'll have a bit better of a an answer there.
Tim Beiko: And yeah, Marson.
Marcin Sobczak: Yeah, I would like just to add that on recommended specification from 7, 8, 7 0.
Marcin Sobczak: If we are running tests on it, and there are, like the the worst scenario is performing at about at about 20 megas per second. So we need to be conscious
Marcin Sobczak: that there will be a possibility to craft a block which will take 3 seconds about 3 seconds to process on 60 megas or 60 mega cut limit. I'm not saying that it's a blocker, but we just need to be to be conscious about that.
Tim Beiko: Yeah.
Tim Beiko: okay, so I do, wanna
Tim Beiko: move on for now, because, yeah, we could probably spend the next 90 min talking about this.
Tim Beiko: But yes, let's follow up on this in the next 2 weeks.
Tim Beiko: and then do we have. There is a discord channel gas limit testing. So we should use that to to actually talk about like,
Tim Beiko: yeah, what what the constraints are and how we're addressing them, or next week's.
Tim Beiko: I guess. Okay. So following up there were 2
Tim Beiko: minor update or updates to at least some of the the fussaka eips 1st off Powell had a had an update to 7, 8, 8, 3 that he wanted to discuss.
Tim Beiko: yeah, I don't know if you're on the call, Powell.
Marcin Sobczak: Yeah. So I can give you some insights about that.
Marcin Sobczak: because it was in touch with Pavel about that. This Apa is proposing. This Pl. Is proposing 2 changes. We already agreed with Pavel that one of them will be withdrawn.
Marcin Sobczak: So it is proposing to to not increase the mean price from 200 to 500. But it's opening the doors for for some case scenarios which we don't want to have, so it will be. It will be reverted, so we'll be keep increasing it from 200 to 500.
Marcin Sobczak: And like right now, in 7, 8, 8, 3, there are 3 small tenders in the code, and this will add the 4th one
Marcin Sobczak: so for on on real network, base and model are always have 22 Byte or more, but in theoretical scenarios which we can like craft to to be worst case setup scenarios, etc. We can craft
Marcin Sobczak: modex usages with with smaller amount of bytes for for base and modulla, and hmm
Marcin Sobczak: it. The the spr is in increase increasing gas price like we we are. We are counting price. If it is 52 Byte, even if it's smaller, thanks to that. like, we will
Marcin Sobczak: cover some at case scenario at case scenarios, and they will have 0 impact on on common cases on my net. So it's a clear win. And yes, I'm I'm I would like to to add this this 4th change to to this.
Tim Beiko: Thanks. Has anyone else had the time to review this or or comments on it?
Tim Beiko: Okay, otherwise. Yeah, let's have people review this Async and try to make a decision in the next week or so.
Tim Beiko: next up so on the last call we discussed some issues with rip 7, 2, 1, 2 needed to be addressed and that led to kind of a a change in the spec. So we opted to effectively write a new eip that provides basically the same functionality. But that addresses these issues. Carl has been working on that. And I'll call, are you on the call.
Carl Beekhuizen: Yeah, Hi, yeah. So I mean a few things. Basically, why do we want this?
Carl Beekhuizen: It's like the most ubiquitous signature scheme across the web. And most modern tooling stacks like it's basically the sha-two 56 of the signature world.
Carl Beekhuizen: Like defaults in Tls or Ssh for Vpns. It's like massive, but the main gain that we care about here is that, like it is the signatures that's used like embedded in most hardware, so like android key stores apple secure Enclave Ub keys.
Carl Beekhuizen: Anyway, we can use a passkey you could. You would now be able to just sign
Carl Beekhuizen: so that means we could like switch to a model where you just sign transactions with face id or fingerprints, or whatever works for you.
Carl Beekhuizen: So I think really massive. Ux unlocks.
Carl Beekhuizen: This exists in the form of Rip 7, 2, 1, 2, deployed across many of the L twos at the moment, as I mentioned previously on here before we had a small bug in 7, 2, 1, 2, which, like basically had undefined behavior and a degenerate edge case.
Carl Beekhuizen: And so we kind of needed a a new spec for that. This
Carl Beekhuizen: eip, 79, 51 is identical from an interface standpoint. So from within the Evm, you can't, you definitely won't be able to tell the difference. But we just patch this one edge case and have
Carl Beekhuizen: extensive tests for it.
Carl Beekhuizen: So that's I think, something we should really consider. Consider having in this fork.
Carl Beekhuizen: we had bls in the previous fork, and I think everyone can. Everyone's a little jaded. After that I totally understand that this is a much simpler cryptographic eip.
Carl Beekhuizen: so it only has one interface slash entry point versus bls, which had 9, I believe
Carl Beekhuizen: And the there's only like internally, cryptographically, there's only like one group where the whole Bls thing has 3, and they all interrelate and weird in wonderful ways.
Carl Beekhuizen: Because it is so ubiquitous. There are just many libraries that have it, and
Carl Beekhuizen: this eip matches the interface of all those libraries. So we don't use Ec recover like we do for the k 1 curve we use just verify as the interface again, just because that matches all the existing libraries. So it should just be plug and play
Carl Beekhuizen: and, unlike the Bls things, we already have extensive tests. Before we wanted to do this, I think there are 780 odd tests in this this new version of the Eip.
Carl Beekhuizen: So I think it's in a really solid place and ready to ship, and something that from Ux standpoint would be fantastic if we can. We can just have in there.
Carl Beekhuizen: As far as I'm concerned, the Major, unknown is just gas cost benchmarking. There's a
Carl Beekhuizen: number in there now which matches rip 7, 2, 1, 2,
Carl Beekhuizen: my intuition is, was probably a little on the cheaper side.
Carl Beekhuizen: But
Carl Beekhuizen: yeah, I think we should like we, we should basically just need to implement those in clients and see where that would would
Carl Beekhuizen: see how much that costs relative to other things, and then we can we can get that.
Tim Beiko: Right? Yeah. Thanks for for sharing. And so I guess yeah, there's 2
Tim Beiko: like decisions here. The first, st it's just like, Are we okay, swapping out, rip 71, 2 for this.
Tim Beiko: It seems like.
Tim Beiko: yeah, we we obviously should. And then I think, next, item is just what do we want to include in definite, too? So I feel like we should make the decisions about the Devnet as a whole rather than just 7, 2, 1, 2, or not.
Tim Beiko: so.
Tim Beiko: But yeah, before we do that, just like, does anyone have any concerns swapping? 7, 2, 1, 2 with 7, 9, 5, 1.
Tim Beiko: Otherwise we could just do this after the call.
Tim Beiko: And then, okay, so assuming there's no concerns,
Tim Beiko: basically on on the last call we had sfi, a bunch of vips for the definite one spec. Devnet one is not live yet. However, we did want to finalize the potential list for definite 2 today, meaning that like assuming that that one goes well, this is what we'd add in definit 2 and then finalize the scope for Fusaka
Tim Beiko: finalize the scope for Fusaka so the 4 eips we still had.
Tim Beiko: In the Cfi list, where the payoff code 7, 2, 1, 2, which is now being replaced by 7, 9, 5, 1 7, 9 0, 7 and 7, 9, 3, 4.
Tim Beiko: I guess. Yes, I would like to hear from client teams. Like which of these should we prioritize for Devnet 2. And then, I think, what doesn't get included for definite 2, we would probably just decline for inclusion now and leave the rest. And Cfi once we've so once we've shipped that this one, we can move move the the rest.
Tim Beiko: But
Tim Beiko: and so, Gabriel, to your question, like so far nothing has been confirmed for Government 2 and we want to figure out of
Tim Beiko: the set of vips we already have set for that. f 1. What do we want to
Tim Beiko: add? In addition to this,
Tim Beiko: and I can post. I'll post the full list of vips for devnet one in the chat.
Tim Beiko: Now. So this is what we had in the event. One.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, yeah, Ben.
Ben Adams: So the 7, 7, 2, 1, 2 replacement.
Ben Adams: Block execution size.
Ben Adams: I'm living on pay fine with that.
Ben Adams: The meter contract size still needs work.
Ben Adams: So would be against that. But
Ben Adams: potentially, we could just do in the interim,
Ben Adams: like 50% on the on the contract sizes.
Tim Beiko: Okay. So so sorry. That was 7, 2, 1, 2. And then what was the other one? Sorry you said I
Tim Beiko: just wanna make sure I got it right.
Ben Adams: 7, 9, 3, 4.
Tim Beiko: Okay. The okay, yeah.
Ben Adams: But yeah, but 7, 7, 9
Ben Adams: o, 7 still needs a bit of work.
Ben Adams: and would be willing to to swap that for Fusaka, for like a 50%
Ben Adams: bump in size, and then look at doing the full eip for Amsterdam.
Tim Beiko: Got it. Thanks.
Tim Beiko: Andrew.
Andrew Ashikhmin: So I agree with Ben. It's the should be the r 1 precompile and the rop execution block size limit.
Andrew Ashikhmin: I I, personally don't have a strong view on on the increase limit, Eip. As to the pay OP. Code, I think
Andrew Ashikhmin: it. It has some implications to the tooling, and it's it's not trivial. So if we decide to do it, I would rather do it early in in Glamsterdam, so we have more time to think about it and test it so I wouldn't do it this late in in Fussaka.
Tim Beiko: Okay.
Tim Beiko: Anyone from Beisu or Geth.
Marius: I put my personal opinion on the chat already. I like 7, 2, 1, 2, and 7, 9, 3, 4.
Marius: I don't mind the others, but I also don't really need to push for them at this moment.
Marius: Okay, and.
Tim Beiko: And then, yeah, Gabriel, you're being put on the spot for basic.
Justin Florentine (Besu): If he's not near a mic, I think.
Justin Florentine (Besu): we don't really have a strong opinion. We published our earlier things. I think the pay. OP. Code is good. We'd like to see that included.
Tim Beiko: Oh, okay. Marius.
Marius: And this is actually just thought maybe I should give, because, Mario said he has his personal opinion.
Marius: So I do think that, like from my point of view, the 7, 2, 1, 2 is pretty important to ship like this has been sitting for so long, and it's kind of a small one. So we should just we should have this
Marius: and the 7, 9, 3, 4 for me, also pretty important one, just to basically be able to
Marius: constrained the other ones. I have less than a routine. But opinion about but I know that the 7, 7, 9 0, 7
Marius: is pretty important for the community as well. So I would say, like, if we can pull off, then it's probably also something good.
Tim Beiko: Thanks.
Tim Beiko: Yeah. Roman.
Roman: But this is a response to Felix. I would recommend to catch up on some manners and thread which I was unable to do. Yet
Roman: there was basically a long discussion on on the implications.
Roman: And I posted the comment earlier in the chat as well, that we're for 7, 2, 1, 2, and 7, 9, 3, 4,
Roman: and we're generally supportive of 7, 9 0. 7.
Roman: But given the extensive discussion, I cannot
Roman: give opinion right now, because I have not caught up yet.
Ben Adams: To to be effective. The 7 9 0, 7 really needs a change in the
Ben Adams: database structures of the El client. And
Ben Adams: it's a bit close to Fusaka.
Ben Adams: In terms of you know where we are in the devnets and things. If it was like at the start, I I would say it's fine.
Ben Adams: It seems a bit too much at this stage.
Tim Beiko: Okay, so I guess if 7, 9 0 7 is gonna be too complicated. Then this is
Tim Beiko: like, yeah, the last of net that we want. It seems like 7, 2, 1, 2, 7, 9, 3, 4 are pretty much supported by by everyone.
Tim Beiko: So I would keep those, hey?
Tim Beiko: And and then like yes, should we
Tim Beiko: decline effectively? 7, 9, 0, 7.
Tim Beiko: And I would also lean towards declining. 5, 9, 2. 0. Because it seems like it has pretty mixed support.
Tim Beiko: and also like, had some unintuitive implications. Okay.
Ben Adams: I wanted to.
lightclient: People think about trying to do 7, 9 0, 7 for this devnet. And if we find the database, changes are just going to be too complex. We drop it
lightclient: like, I know the database changes for us is only like one or 200 lines of code. It's not
lightclient: substantial.
lightclient: I don't know if that's pretty different for everyone else.
Ben Adams: Yeah.
lightclient: But it's 1 of those things.
Ben Adams: Changing all that good and pricing.
Ben Adams: I mean, I I think it would be better just to like
Ben Adams: increase the contract sizes by like 50% for Fusaka, as like a
Ben Adams: an interim, feel good, and then not not feel good. But
Ben Adams: you know it would be useful for Dev. And then
Ben Adams: in Glamsterdam we we do the the fuller, more complete thing.
lightclient: Yeah. But it already has a lot of things that people really want to do that are gonna be super critical.
lightclient: And
lightclient: it feels like we can just focus some effort now over the next month, and really lock in 7, 9 0, 7. Now, when there's not so much going on in the year.
lightclient: and then Glamsterdam is open for try to, the all the different yeah piece being proposed.
lightclient: Yep, my like, I just see us having the same conversation again, and
lightclient: 6 or 9 months, and then saying, You know, there's a lot of stuff going at this fork.
lightclient: we should just wait till the next fork.
Ben Adams: Yeah, but it's it's the fact. We're at the end of the 4 promise. That's that's the main part.
lightclient: I don't think we're at the end of the fork almost.
Roman: Okay,
Tim Beiko: Robin. Yeah.
Roman: Yeah. Quick comment. My understanding that the problem with 7, 9 0, 7 was not this additional index.
Roman: but, like other explored implications of storing these huge contracts and and the database like. No, nobody just did the the analysis.
lightclient: I mean, I think Julia did look into it, and sequential reads is extremely fast from disks. So it's not really
lightclient: a major issue, but it's 1 of those things where we probably aren't going to get the best information until clients actually start to look at it.
lightclient: And I don't think that it like. It's not a big lift to begin looking at it like the whole implementation of this is probably sub 500 lines of code.
lightclient: and I think it's like a good stretch goal for us for the next devnet.
lightclient: And if we start implementing and we learn that this is not going to work out. Then we drop it no worries, and we look at Amsterdam.
Roman: Okay, I'm gonna Flip, I'm persuaded.
Roman: Rep is also for including 7, 9, 0, 7, or at least trying to implement it.
Roman: And if it's too difficult, we can always take it.
Tim Beiko: I guess one thing.
lightclient: Ultimately, the thing is that this is very important. IP for the community. They've been asking for this type of thing for many years, and we're close
lightclient: like we're really close. We just need to push through a little bit over the next month, and I think we can give it to them.
Tim Beiko: I think one thing to note about definite 2 is, even though Devnet one already has a bunch of things in it. The 2 other Ips we're considering are quite small. So 7, 2, 1, 2 is not trivial, but I believe most clients already have it implemented and would only need
Tim Beiko: would would only need
Tim Beiko: like to- to- to do the changes add from Vip 7, 9, 5, 1, 7, 9, 3, 4 is like also pretty straightforward. And it's like a a check on the size. So I guess.
Tim Beiko: like, yeah, do we want to commit to have it in Devnet 2. If it doesn't work out in Devnet 2.
Tim Beiko: We do that, and I get there's 2 comments about like tentatively including. This is why we call it scheduled for inclusion now, and not included, like, you know, if we learn something as we're working on it, that makes it no longer be a good fit, we should reevaluate that
Tim Beiko: but if we want to, if we feel like we have to actually include it on the Devnet, then I think it makes sense to ship that one and then potentially have that be like the one slightly more complex feature of that the 2. And if it works out, then great, we ship it. If we find that the issues are too big and that it's gonna delay the fork.
Tim Beiko: yeah, we we should just remove it.
Tim Beiko: So I guess if yeah, I guess and rest are
Tim Beiko: in favor. I know. Basically, never mind, Eric, on.
Tim Beiko: Yeah.
Tim Beiko: Do you have thoughts about this
Tim Beiko: If we did this, I think we should probably not do pay off code, and then that too. So this means, I think, if we include 7, 9 0. 7, and and there's some concerns we should probably
Tim Beiko: decline pay from this fork.
Ben Adams: Happy to experiment.
Ben Adams: Yeah, how it goes.
Tim Beiko: You're what sorry.
Ben Adams: Happy to experiment. See how it goes.
Tim Beiko: Okay.
Tim Beiko: Okay. Bay, Su. Argon.
Tim Beiko: I don't.
Andrew Ashikhmin: Andrew, we can try experimenting, implementing it.
Andrew Ashikhmin: So I haven't thought about it in detail. But
Andrew Ashikhmin: well, at least we can. Yeah, we can, we can start experimenting with it.
Tim Beiko: Okay, so let's do that, then let's do so so this means we'll leave 7, 2, 1, 2, 7, 9, 3, 4, 7, 9 0, 7 in Cfi, for now move 5, 9, 2 0 to Dfi. And then once we have shipped Devnet one assuming things don't break there, and there's not like a bigger correction. We would default to move these 3 Ips to Sfi and depart. Devnet 2
Tim Beiko: and then, if we find some issue with any of the Ips we should, we should reconsider whatever we want them in the fork, or just to remove them. And if there's some investigation that we can do on 7, 9 0, 7 in the meantime. Yeah, we should do that.
Tim Beiko: Yeah.
Tim Beiko: But I think we are set on the maximum possible scope for Fusaka. So as of this point
Tim Beiko: anything that's not in this list effectively out of scope. And if everything goes well, then, what's in
Tim Beiko: Sfi now? And the Devnet? 2 scope will be what ships.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So that includes pay. OP. Code is what I'm hearing.
Tim Beiko: No, I would say we, if we if we move forward with 7, 2
Tim Beiko: sorry with 7, 9, 0, 7, I would move to not do pay, and Devnet 2,
Tim Beiko: because it seems like most teams didn't support it. Then, if 7, 9 0 7 is already going to be complex.
Tim Beiko: I try to limit complexity, but.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Sure.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Okay.
Tim Beiko: Okay.
soispoke: Yeah. Over here.
Tim Beiko: Okay? Great. So, yeah, that's it for Fusaka.
Tim Beiko: So
Tim Beiko: looking ahead for Amsterdam, like, we discussed previous couple of calls, we want to start and consider headliners for the 4 1st line on that before we we we discuss other eips. So there were 3 headliners proposed already. I wanted to make the space if either of those proposals on the call to yeah, give a quick overview, and then I think it would be helpful. If
Tim Beiko: people on this call have like questions or concerns that need to be investigated to raise them, so that the champions, for these headliners can go and look into that over the coming weeks. There were also a bunch of like smaller, more minor eips. I don't think we should start making decisions about those, but I wanted to at least flag them so people could start proactively reviewing them.
Tim Beiko: But yes the 1st the 1st headliner candidate was fossil. I don't know if
Tim Beiko: anyone anyone championing fossil is on the call.
Tim Beiko: Okay, I linked the 3 threads in the chat so we can. We can follow up Async and discuss another call, and second was Evm. 64.
Wei Tang: Yeah, but I'm I'm here. So I'm the champion for 64. So this is something that
Wei Tang: I hope I'll probably give a formal introduction on this later. But at this moment I really want some more reviews. But the basic idea is quite simple. It's just we define a new group of codes that are only operating on the least significant of a stack value.
Wei Tang: And the good thing about this is that we can then, I mean the the each operation is done significantly faster, because you only have to do one statement of 4 for the 2, 56 bits.
Wei Tang: We currently have 2 different merchants.
Wei Tang: The 1st version is
Wei Tang: built directly on the legacy, or I, I would probably just use this name legacy Evm, which we define a prefix of code, and and the other set of the the opcode that follows it is is the 64 bits operation
Wei Tang: and the good thing. The the advantage of doing this is the way is less complicated. And we we just have. I mean.
Wei Tang: we have we? We can make the interrupt with 2, 56 bits really easily, because it's just a different set of codes. It can work with
Wei Tang: other calls really easily, and the second option is built on top of Eof. In this case, what I, what you have 64 will need is a change to Evm format, which does. Yes, we have a question already?
Wei Tang: No. So- so- so, yeah.
stokes: Sorry. Yeah, after this I just wanted to circle back to fossil for a second. I was just raising my hand for that.
Wei Tang: Okay, yeah, I will. Okay, I'll continue then. Then the second version, second option is built on top of Ui.
Wei Tang: And in this case we do need to do a change to the evm format which add a type.
Wei Tang: a type parameter into the code section. So the interpreter can can know, whether is running a code section of the the legacy evm or evm 64 and I think this this is the option I would prefer is it will be open up. A lot of organization
Wei Tang: approaches for us. And we can, we can basically write really fast jits for 64, like building on top of existing ui format.
Wei Tang: Quite well. And yeah, this, this is basically the the current proposal. And I will really looking for some reviews at this moment. If you have questions, I would really like to answer them. So
Wei Tang: yeah.
Tim Beiko: Okay, thanks any questions. Oh, there's a question by kev
Tim Beiko: there, there's a question by Kev around whether this has been prototyped and
Tim Beiko: and and whether we have a feeling of what the actual performance improvements are.
Wei Tang: I have a I have a prototype in for the the option one which just directly build on top of the the legacy. Vm, I haven't really benchmark it yet, but I will hopefully do that soon. So, but but I mean, if we write a jit for that, it will be
Wei Tang: faster because we are just not doing the actual work of of the actual extra 1 92 bits. So so for those, those computationally intensive operations functions that we only we can only use 64 bits. So this will be beneficial.
Tim Beiko: Thanks. I think, like, yeah, having hard benchmarks would definitely be helpful here. Are there
Tim Beiko: other questions, comments, concerns?
Tim Beiko: Okay? Then. Otherwise, I think, yeah, we can continue this conversation on these positions. And then,
Tim Beiko: yeah, move on to fossil so I think,
Tim Beiko: was, yeah. Toba, I think, is on the call. Maybe if you want to start to give like a quick overview. But then there were already a few questions about fossil in the chat, so we could get to those as well.
thomasthiery: Yeah, sure. So maybe first, st I can signal that I did give like a more sort of like fleshed out presentation on so like, everyone can sort of like refer to to the presentation, I guess if they want more details. But yeah, for so is Vip 7, 8, 0, 5 we
thomasthiery: presented it as a potential headliner for Amsterdam. What it essentially does is basically really improving ethereum censorship resistance by enabling multiple validators to just make sure that any transaction that is valid according to the protocol rules is actually included in ethereum blocks, and basically does so by having, like the multiple validators.
thomasthiery: build inclusion lists that are filled with transactions from the public main pool to impose some constraints on the
thomasthiery: on the builder. It has, like a bunch of interesting properties. I think maybe highlighting. Why it matters. It's because I mean, today, we have, like more than 80% of all works that are produced by just like the 2 builders. And we can just like decide whether to include or exclude transactions sort of arbitrarily. So folks, basically, what foci does is like it fixes this
thomasthiery: by empowering like the more like obviously decentralized set of validators to
thomasthiery: enforce inclusion constraints and build those plugs.
thomasthiery: for who it benefits it benefits basically everyone because it ensures. Like all the transactions are included on chain without sort of like any discrimination between different kinds of transactions that are just like arbitrarily decided by an external party instead of local.
thomasthiery: yeah, it has some
thomasthiery: benefits like you could like tie to scaling and improving ux. But of course, like the main, very big feature is improving censorship resistance.
thomasthiery: And why not? I think, yeah, it's really a solution to basically mitigate the censorship risk we've been having since. Pbs was introduced.
thomasthiery: and I don't know. Like the builder market is very, very centralized. It's like sort of inherent, because it's due to private. And I don't think it would change. And yeah, we have observed, like, sort of like increasing vertical integration across builders relays, and so forth over time and like, not the other way around. So
thomasthiery: yeah, I think there is a question also of like the urgency of including it. We've so that's been discussed and proposed a lot like there was another think fossil is is much better in many sense. But, like.
thomasthiery: yeah, there is a case for fossil, I think, because now we are like quite lucky that there's not much censorship on the network. I feel like in the future that can definitely change and make the inclusion of something like fossil or proposals to improve. I don't know censorship, resistance and privacy much
thomasthiery: harder to get in in the 1st place. So yeah, I think there is some big urgency in taking care of this. In terms of technical readiness. It's also, like
thomasthiery: like now fully implemented in 5 different clients and running on local, and get that are interrupting with each other soon. Lighthouse, I think. We've had 11 fossil breakouts. And we made sure, like, it's compatible with everything that's sort of like already in protocol, and also like other proposals. So
thomasthiery: yeah.
thomasthiery: I think there is a good case for fossil. I really want to. For for the for us to move this forward and not wait until things get back to get a proposal like fossil included.
Tim Beiko: Thanks.
Tim Beiko: One question that came up earlier in the chat was just the interaction of a fossil with delayed execution and block access lists. I don't know if you have like a some thoughts on that.
Tim Beiko: Yeah.
thomasthiery: Yeah. So there has been some recent progress on that front. It was mainly driven by Tony and Francisco. But there are like some very nice integrations between the 3 of them. So it basically works
thomasthiery: with delayed execution. But like, there are like some tricks that you have to sort of like deal with. To make it work together and plug level access is actually sort of like, make that easier. So there is a write up by Tony that I can link. But there is a nice integration between the 3 which is very nice.
Tim Beiko: Fixed any other questions. Thoughts about fossil.
Zane Starr | OpenRPC: Oh!
Tim Beiko: And okay, then, yeah, thanks a lot for jumping on a quick overview.
Tim Beiko: next up, the other proposed headliner was available at the stations. It's the one I have the least context on. I'm not sure if the author is
Tim Beiko: on the call.
Mingfei Zhang: Yeah, I'm here.
Tim Beiko: I hope.
Tim Beiko: Do you want to give a quick overview.
Mingfei Zhang: Oh, yeah, I will give us quick presentation for this.
Mingfei Zhang: Hmm.
Mingfei Zhang: oh, sorry. Wait wait a few minutes.
Mingfei Zhang: Okay.
Tim Beiko: Yeah. Thanks.
Mingfei Zhang: Okay? So
Mingfei Zhang: yeah, Hello, everyone. So today, I'm excited to present my eip 79, 79, 42 available attestation. So this is a proposal designed to make ethereum provostic fully reorg resilience. So first, st we are talking about what is real. So
Mingfei Zhang: as we as we can see, is it
Mingfei Zhang: table? So, despite money advancing ethereum approvals
Mingfei Zhang: protocol. The system also feeds the many new attacks. So some of tech we have already know about, like the ex, the balancing attack. It's a Lebanese attack and other attacks about attacking the Gasper
Mingfei Zhang: Cusper like the bouncing attack. So, and some of the attack, like the justification with holding. So these attacks they mainly focus on
Mingfei Zhang: attacking ghost or attacking customer, and they call mainly cause reorganizations, kind of like so the balance attack is more powerful, and it cause the
Mingfei Zhang: finalization. Stop also the Boston attack. So these attacks they have some mitigation by theorem. However, some of this mitigation has its limitations, like the proposal posting the.
Som | Erigon: Mitigation.
Mingfei Zhang: Oh, sorry I can't hear.
Mingfei Zhang: Okay, so the proposal boosting was 1st proposed, and it is. It set a very high boosting, and it calls sandwich, and then it is degraded to 40%, and it cannot fully prevent, however, if we set the anniversary stack to more than 20.
Mingfei Zhang: Also, the bouncing attack was 1st mitigated by the safe slot, so the justification cannot be
Mingfei Zhang: update if if apple has processed it slots. However, this medication is now removed, so
Mingfei Zhang: currently is now still facing the bouncing attacks. Vulnerability also, the justification withholding attack is not fully mitigated, and this cause, the staircase attack. This is one of kind of justification, withholding attacks
Mingfei Zhang: warranty, and this attack has been fixed in the current, and it is not really be fully mitigation, and what we want to do is
Mingfei Zhang: to keep the parent restriction. The idea is that
Mingfei Zhang: so in the Vernida Protocol, so if there is no adversary, the honest validator can propose one block of another. So the idea is like that. So this is block, one by one, and oh, sorry. And if there are some proposals that want to do something harm like they just want to make the system
Mingfei Zhang: very bad. So what they want to do is that they just build a block and dot point to the previous. They point to another block, and they may cause a chain fault, and there are 2 chains, and there are any other situation like this is
Mingfei Zhang: so, it may withhold a block, and it may released after this block is proposed, and cause a
Mingfei Zhang: cause. A fog like this. So this block, it will be fogged.
Mingfei Zhang: So
Mingfei Zhang: so this is why restricting the parent is very important. Our idea is that since the only validators always vote for the head. So if this is a chain and honest validator like the blue one, they always vote for this, and the adversary may vote for this and other blocks we don't know. So
Mingfei Zhang: what we want to do is make the honest validators vote be the parent candidate. So
Mingfei Zhang: so the idea is that. So if the adversary want to propose a block to this, this cannot be
Mingfei Zhang: our valid parents, since this block, it does not receive enough
Mingfei Zhang: attestations, because only 1 3rd of the State is controlled by the adversary, and we assume that we require that more than 1 3rd of attestation would for a block. This block can be the value, the parent so.
Tim Beiko: Big Faye.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, yeah.
Tim Beiko: I guess. Like, yeah. 2 things. One is would it be possible to share these slides in the chat to get for people to be able to review Async. But also, yeah. Given the topic, I think. Apologies about this, we should probably yeah, we should probably discuss this more on the the Cl call.
Tim Beiko: yeah. And this is my bad. I I think I I.
Mingfei Zhang: Yeah, yeah, I see. I see. So I'm I'm.
Tim Beiko: But if if you want to post the slides in the chat, I think we can.
Tim Beiko: yeah, we can have conversations, I think, as well on the youth. Magicians threads. If there's anything really important you want to finish like the minute or so.
Tim Beiko: go ahead.
Mingfei Zhang: Yeah, I think we will talk about it later. So.
Tim Beiko: Yeah. But yeah, I think, if yeah, if people can, if people can review the the actual slides that would be that'd be helpful.
Tim Beiko: Okay.
Mingfei Zhang: Okay. Okay.
Tim Beiko: I'm thanks.
Tim Beiko: I'm okay. And I think those were the
Tim Beiko: headliners that have been proposed for Amsterdam so far.
Tim Beiko: if people want to propose more. There is the East magicians thread for that.
Tim Beiko: yeah. Any other Glamsterdam Level conversation people want to have. Otherwise. There's also like something about pay that we should get back to in the chat. But
Tim Beiko: yeah want to wrap up the collapse of that headliner thread before
Toni Wahrstaetter: I could quickly talk about blocks of accesses. Maybe we forgot that now.
Tim Beiko: yeah. So yeah, I guess one question I would have for Bl is like, Do you think that's like a liner feature? And like should be the main thing of the fork, or, like, I know, we've talked about combining it potentially with fossil, potentially with delighted execution, so that might be
Tim Beiko: also worth getting into.
Toni Wahrstaetter: Yeah, I'm not sure about combining it with both of the 2, because it's more like block 5. Access list is a feature that helps delete execution, and possible to
Toni Wahrstaetter: be more aligned and to work more smoothly together. I saw Justin's comments and the chat that it might not be a headline. I think we can discuss that
Toni Wahrstaetter: right now. I would say. It's it has the size of a headliner.
Toni Wahrstaetter: I did the specs already, and there. It definitely looks like it's more of a headliner size. But yeah, debatable. Just to give a brief context on the eap, it's 7, 8, 28
Toni Wahrstaetter: and block level accesses, tries to introduce some parallelization.
Toni Wahrstaetter: So we can do batch I/O plus parallelly, executing transactions or executing transaction and doing the state root calculation in parallel.
Toni Wahrstaetter: So this is the primary goal there, and some secondary goals would be that.
Toni Wahrstaetter: for example, imagine a Ck world.
Toni Wahrstaetter: You get the proofs, and you want to up
Toni Wahrstaetter: the your state, and for that you can use the block of access list, because it essentially contains a full state. So without executing. You could keep your state up to date. And this is also nice for syncing, because we could kind of take the healing phase and replace it with the block of access list.
Toni Wahrstaetter: and then do the check. If if you are on the right chain at the end by comparing the headers
Toni Wahrstaetter: and regarding helping fossil and delayed execution. So the thing there is that fossil comes with post execution checks. So you have to execute the whole block, and then you have to check. Was there any transaction that was on an inclusion list? But it was not in the block, so you would have to try to append that transaction to the block and see if it could have been appended. If so, then the block would be valid
Toni Wahrstaetter: and Blocklet access list help there, because
Toni Wahrstaetter: usually you would need the post state for that.
Toni Wahrstaetter: and you only get the post state after execution. But with Blocklet access list you could have a function that looks like
Toni Wahrstaetter: it takes the pre-state and the block level access list and outputs the post state so you could do any checks that you would normally do post execution. You could do pre-execution.
Toni Wahrstaetter: and this is kind of where it aligns to that execution with puzzle a little bit.
Tim Beiko: Thanks.
Tim Beiko: Any questions.
Tim Beiko: Comments.
Tim Beiko: Yeah. Lucas.
Łukasz Rozmej: So one comment of mine about like scheduling. And so if we decide we want to do block access list, I wouldn't. I'm a bit reluctant to include fossil before, because then, with block access list, we would have to rework fossil a lot. So
Łukasz Rozmej: maybe it would be better to include them both, or actually block access list going before fossil just for
Łukasz Rozmej: redundancy of the work. It kind of seems. But it needs 1st decision. If you want to include block Ssds. In the 1st place.
Łukasz Rozmej: that's all.
Tim Beiko: Thanks, anzago.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Yeah, more on the process side around block level access lists and also discuss this a bunch with Tony. Basically the the way the structure of block level access works is that it's kind of it has 2 separate aspects to it. It's the the read side and the right side. And the count proposal, I think, for the for the reads basically only includes the location and for the rights, the location, and the values.
Ansgar Dietrichs: each on a per transaction level. It makes a lot of sense, if we want to ship both of these aspects of it to actually combine the implementation, because you can get a lot of synergies out of this, so you shouldn't have this completely, separately specified. But in terms of governance we should decide on both of these things independently. So I think we should really. Maybe that means splitting the Ap. But either way, like we should decide on. Do we want the reads? Do we want the rights plus diffs.
Ansgar Dietrichs: and then, if we want both, we ship them in a unified way. But if we only want to ship one of the 2. Then we should basically explicitly talk about that. So just on the process side.
Tim Beiko: Thanks. Guillaume.
Guillaume: Yeah, I mean, that's kind of building on what said, I am generally supportive of blocks access list, because I think it's it's a good 1st step to what I want to happen next the biggest issue I have with, you know, scheduling this right now is that there's actually 5 flavors of it. And I think, actually, there's a lot more. And we need to really really
Guillaume: limit the amount of of moving parts
Guillaume: so that we know what we ship. Because no, we're not gonna ship like we can't do it in 5 steps like it's it's completely useless if we? If we just move this in like many steps, because, you know, some of it might not be shipped. Some of it. You might change your mind and realize you took a wrong turn. So you need to get the final design. And I would say, the cip is.
Guillaume: quote unquote, small enough that we could reach a design, but I think before we even talk about scheduling it, and Tony knows my opinion. So it's not a surprise to him. I think before we talk about scheduling him, we should really get this this designed and and properly understood.
Tim Beiko: It's some.
Som | Erigon: So on some level, one or more flavors are already there, and, like historically
Som | Erigon: enabling parallel execution, and so on.
Som | Erigon: We have had some eips in the past as well.
Som | Erigon: Tony, do you know why we did not ship
Som | Erigon: this, or a variation of this in the past. And what changed now that we're in the position to do it.
Toni Wahrstaetter: Yeah, I think I think this is primarily because the community had some very clear stance on what the
Toni Wahrstaetter: what we want to achieve in the next one or 2 years, and it feels like l. 1 scaling was definitely on that list, and I would even say, on the top of that list. So
Toni Wahrstaetter: I would say, the focus shifted towards looking more into our one scaling and block of Access list. So parallelization was always a thing, and it. It is a thing today, right? All clients, almost all clients, have some prefetcher logic, some pre loading logic that already achieves that and is very good for that. In the average case.
Toni Wahrstaetter: block level access list would now go one step further by making sure that every block is parallelizable. There is this other year. Pf, I think it's 7, 8, 25, with the capping the gas limit, which is also already a
Toni Wahrstaetter: a step into the right direction, there to make sure that blocks are actually parallelizable, no matter if it's the worst case or the average case.
Toni Wahrstaetter: And just one more comment. I totally agree with what Anska and Guam said. We have to kind of get to the final design as fast as possible the 5 designs that were mentioned. This was just the 1st post I had on design space exploration.
Toni Wahrstaetter: But in the meantime I've been talking with some client teams. There was also a lot of great input in the discord channel, so check that out. And essentially it felt like. What clients wanted was the post transaction status, because this has many different advantages, not only for parallelization, but also parallel state route calculation or for execution by state updates. So the post transaction value seemed like something that clients really wanted.
Toni Wahrstaetter: and the storage locations. This is then something where clients could
Toni Wahrstaetter: replace Prefetcher code with the storage locations, because this is just a deterministic list
Toni Wahrstaetter: that is 100% correct, and it always gives you the
Toni Wahrstaetter: the right locations. And you're never yeah in the position where you run your prefetter. And it's actually incorrect.
Toni Wahrstaetter: Yeah, I think that that's kind of.
Łukasz Rozmej: I want to just add that I disagree that this wasn't the focus, because vertical trees and its witnesses carried a lot of these properties that we are now simplifying. Let's say with block access lists. So it was the focus of research for the last few years. It's just in a more complex form. And now it's being somewhat simplified with this proposal.
Toni Wahrstaetter: Oh, yeah, totally agree. I was more me thinking of focusing on kind of how to make it best for l, 1 scaling.
Som | Erigon: Are there going to be any?
Som | Erigon: My apologies? Changes in the block size because of this? Let's say you've
Som | Erigon: manage to scale the block nx of what it is. And then you have to ship
Som | Erigon: a lot of extra data as well, because right now, that is not being.
Som | Erigon: you know, taking place and like
Som | Erigon: with higher block limits and more transactions.
Som | Erigon: the bandwidth would be like a premium.
Toni Wahrstaetter: Yes, this is correct. So block type access list would add some additional size to the current block size.
Toni Wahrstaetter: And the worst case is not a problem here, because the worst case would be around 0 point 9 MB. So this is smaller than the worst case from call data, and the 2 are exclusive. So you cannot build a block that has a lot of call data and a big block level access list. But we should more focus on the average case here, anyway, and on average, the block of access list design, as it is in the Ap. Right now, would add on average, 40 kB per block.
Toni Wahrstaetter: And this is definitely a non negligible
Toni Wahrstaetter: increase. And we should, yeah, carefully analyze that. I think when we look at the pros and cons, I think it's worth it. But this is definitely, I would say, one of the most important points to to stress here that the block that access lists are not like
Toni Wahrstaetter: a super small object compared to yeah, anything that requires witnesses. It's very small. But yeah, definitely. Some some block average block size increase.
Tim Beiko: Odds are.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Yeah, on this point, I just wanted to briefly add a kind of caveat, just that, indeed, as account throughput levels, and especially at current pricing levels, even if we were to increase throughput. And this kind of extra data consumption is indeed not a concern, because for the same gas that you otherwise would have spent on call data. You already like, spend it on state breeds or writes instead. And so you can't spend it on call data. So the worst case block size does not actually get worse. However, there's a big big caveat there, because
Ansgar Dietrichs: going forward, we have more headroom to scale state accesses, reads or rights.
Ansgar Dietrichs: And then we have to scale data. And so this could actually change in the future. So basically we are locking us potentially in and basically, as we would want to change that pricing, we would then hit that wall, that now, basically, there's this, this this limit.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Same thing where we would. We are looking into these like multi dimensional pricing. Again, a bit of a scary term. But like, basically just like, make it so that you can consume call data and execution at the same time. Now, that would then also basically run into this bottleneck. And
Ansgar Dietrichs: none of this again, this is just a qualitative argument, not a quantitative argument. So I think over the next few weeks we will look into quantitatively. What does it actually mean, and what kind of relative consumption levels gas limit levels that would actually start to be constraining start to become an issue. And then hopefully, we have an empirical basis to actually make that decision. But I just wanted to flag that this argument that when you just brought up holds at today's levels, but not necessarily in that future that we're aiming to enable here.
Tim Beiko: Thanks.
Tim Beiko: And okay, anything else on block level access list. For now
Tim Beiko: otherwise, I do want to come back to this
Tim Beiko: pay OP code and and devnet inclusion. So previously, we said we would remove pay from Fusaka. It seems like a bunch of people in the chat voice that they they would actually like to keep it. And some of the client team said they already have implementations or the implementations are trivial. So there was a an ask, or should we consider this for definite? 3 for Fusaka? So
Tim Beiko: 2 min ago, we said we wanted definitely 2 to be the last definitely where we add things, I think, even if we want to add one more, for with definite 3 we should be clear that
Tim Beiko: like, we need to ship what's in Devnet one, and then what's in Devnet 2. And then, if that all goes well we could potentially add pay to to defnet 3.
Tim Beiko: But yeah, how
Tim Beiko: how do people feel about that? Do we want to keep pay? Cfi, and then add it to Devnet 3. If everything goes wrong, everything goes correct, and we don't see major issues. And then that's 1 and 2.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, Ben.
Ben Adams: Yeah. So a very simple opcode in terms of it's just old that you delete 90% of the implementation.
Ben Adams: The the main thing would be around testing it, I guess.
Tim Beiko: Okay. Since base. You also wanted in Defnet 3 at the latest. 3 yeah. Lewis.
Luis Pinto | Besu: Yeah. So this came about in Uf, well, it was mandatory to to, because of the to to include it because of the
Luis Pinto | Besu: not passing the gas to the call anymore.
Luis Pinto | Besu: I see it was still useful as a simplification for, and even security wise, wise for mitigating reentrancing calls.
Luis Pinto | Besu: So I haven't seen that much pushback on arguments against it. So yeah, would like if there's any arguments against it.
Luis Pinto | Besu: But it's it's a really simple one, as Ben said, to add.
lightclient: I mean, I feel like I gave arguments against it last all quartz.
lightclient: which is that it's a very simple thing to implement. But the implications of implementing it are not as simple.
lightclient: And I don't know if people have thought really deeply about this, how we want people to use the epm going forward.
lightclient: It seems like something that people just want to do, because it's easy, and we can just do it. And it might make some like people's lives easier. But have we thought about? Is this really what we want the Evm to look like? Because we can't undo this.
Luis Pinto | Besu: As okay. So as I, I think the the use case is already available through self district. So it's not something new that we're gonna add, it's just making it explicit with the pay, with your code.
Andrew Ashikhmin: Yeah, I I'd like to add to like like clients. Point is that it changes the tracer. And if you want to trace historical balances. It just adds a new mechanism to transfer. If, which is fine. My only worry is that
Andrew Ashikhmin: it's maybe too late for Fusaka, and it's easy to implement in the Evm. But it has the
Andrew Ashikhmin: non trivial implements in
Andrew Ashikhmin: consequences. Down, down the stack, and we are disregarding that. We're only thinking, oh, it's easy to implement. Let's implement it.
Tim Beiko: Okay. So I think,
Tim Beiko: I'm fine, Le, leaving it. Cfi, if we want for the next 2 weeks. But I think we should definitely.
Tim Beiko: like, yeah. Have a better grasp on the implication if we are to include it in the 3.
Tim Beiko: But I would not.
Tim Beiko: But we're not gonna get that in the next 2 weeks.
Tim Beiko: So if we're not, then should be just remove it.
Andrew Ashikhmin: Is it possible to move it to Cfi for Glamsterdam, or something.
Tim Beiko: I would not do that yet. When we do this, it's like
Tim Beiko: we. We can propose it again for Amsterdam. We can have that conversation again in a few months, but I think it would be a mistake to decide today, when we don't even know what the biggest feature
Andrew Ashikhmin: Correct.
Tim Beiko: That will be yeah. So like, not like nothing against considering it for Glamsterdam. But I I think we should make those decisions independently.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, Daniel.
Daniel Lehrner (Besu): Yeah, I just wanted to say we we should be careful not not to repeat a similar mistake as with Evf, and maybe ask smart contract developers why they they wanted, you know, to to get outside voices, because there are things, maybe, that that we are missing.
Tim Beiko: Okay. So this makes me lean towards the word like, yeah, previous decisions removing it from Fusaka
Tim Beiko: and reconsidering for Amsterdam. And if it's mostly a question of like
Tim Beiko: design implications and community support. Then we have plenty of time to do that for Amsterdam, and if it's a trivial implementation,
Tim Beiko: if it's a trivial implementation, then it shouldn't be too too big to add to the fork, regardless of what goes in. But
Tim Beiko: yeah, given, we're already pretty full for Fuzaka. We've already stretched into this. In the 3rd definite I would lean towards removing it and just keeping your scope as is for basically what we had for def one, and then adding,
Tim Beiko: 7, 9, 1, 2, 7, 9, 3, 4, 7, 9, 0, 7 2,
Tim Beiko: okay.
Tim Beiko: one more thing that I wanted to bring up on this call so there was an eip in the past about a versioning scheme for eips that the testing team had put together with, never mind they wanted to discuss it again on this call.
Tim Beiko: yeah.
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: See.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, I'm on. Yeah.
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: Yeah, hey? So I I won't take much of everyone's time. I just wanted to go quickly and suggest that we do the IP versioning scheme for all the Ips that we plan to include for Glamsterdam, which means that any IP that reaches the reviews. Date
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: should have a version, and then any consequent changes should probably ha add a an a minimum
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: at the end, saying, what was the change? If it was just a
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: linguistic change or deeper change, etc. Based on the spec that is written in the aip. There were concerns from raised from Tim about the friction that this would add to the
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: to the process.
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: and I think that we, like all core devs, have had instances where tests
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: and client implementations did not align just because we were not sure about the version of the aip that these tests were testing or the version of the implementation of that client that we are trying against these tests, or that even the version of the spec, like as an eels that we are using to generate these test
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: what they're called.
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: yeah, to generate like the test. So like a lot of a lot of things would benefit a lot of things in the process of the development and implementation of these Ips would benefit from this versioning scheme and this little friction that this adds, shouldn't account for should be like outweighed by the benefits that we get in testing, etc.
Ahmad Bitar | Nethermind: And yeah, like, I'd like to hear from everyone their opinions and potentially, if if there is like if if no, if people haven't even haven't haven't started looking at the aip, please do. And like, we can decide on it later. Obviously.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, I've I've looked at it in the past, and I frequently wrestle with the eip bot and get
Tim Beiko: and harass people to go wrestle with the eip bot. So I think
Tim Beiko: anything that's blocked on the eip.
Tim Beiko: But then, like anything that's like a strict enforcement.
Tim Beiko: it is something I would. I would have like pretty big concerns on like I would want us. I would basically want us to come up with like a proposal. For how do you actually automate this and and not add more friction to the process if you ship it? My counter proposal was like, let's just use the hash because we get it for free every time we do a commit to the eip. I think this gets you basically the value of clearly identifying the changes which
Tim Beiko: which
Tim Beiko: which is like half the battle. It doesn't get you. This idea of like, okay, the the magnitude of the change, and it doesn't quite couple it to the process. But I think if if that's kind of what we want like, then we should probably just have a much deeper rethink of eips around like, you know. What do we want statuses to mean? How do we want that to work with versions? How should that work with devnets and whatnot. And to me this feels like a much, much bigger can of worms that like we shouldn't just add a new
Tim Beiko: versioning scheme about like the the updates to the eip without taking this consideration. So I would say, like, if we want to say that, like the hash, is like the official version, have a way to automatically add that to the eips with a bot or something strongly support it. But I I think, any sort of versioning scheme should be much more comprehensive, and and reflect, like the Eip, state, the Hard Fork state, and all of that, and we should make sure the automation is is set up supported.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, I'm Andrew.
Andrew Ashikhmin: Yeah, I agree with you, Tim. I think this is a bit unnecessary, this this extra version, and it introduces more friction, because, we can always check the history in Github, but I think what would be helpful is to be stricter about
Andrew Ashikhmin: freezing eip commits on the devnet spec, because sometimes we do it and sometimes we don't. And I think that this is really helpful, because this gives us the level
Andrew Ashikhmin: of that we should target. So we are targeting devnet, say, 5 versions. We are doing tests for Devnet 5 versions. We're doing implementations for Devnet 5 versions. Everything is frozen, and we should do it like reasonably well in advance, and like new commands, can be merged, and so on. So.
Andrew Ashikhmin: But we'll have an explicit like for Devnet 6, we'll we can see the diffs between the commits and update everything to the Devnet. 6 version.
danceratopz: I.
Tim Beiko: Yeah, hey, Gavin?
danceratopz: It's, hey? It's it's Dan here. From the testing team from East.
danceratopz: thanks a lot Tim, for the input, about having a more sort of fully encompassed solution, and I completely agree.
danceratopz: So I think my proposal would be as the Eip, 7,577 stands. Now.
danceratopz: it's a little bit out of date, because that was written when we used the 1st available reference implementation from any client team in order to fill the test for any IP.
danceratopz: And now we've moved since Prague 5, I think of September like last year or October. We actually
danceratopz: generally, and I think we've managed to always use eels as the reference implementation as it should be, and
danceratopz: if eels was more tightly coupled with the eip process.
danceratopz: that if you propose an eip and you get
danceratopz: like Cfid, then you should propose an implementation in eels, and the and the Eip
danceratopz: document is tightly coupled to this eip implementation.
danceratopz: then it becomes a bit more reasonable to start adding a versioning on top of that.
danceratopz: I I don't want to take up much more time. It's just a thought that that we've had in the meantime.
danceratopz: Thanks. Yeah. I.
Tim Beiko: I think. And yeah, I think this is like an important discussion to have like I. But I do want to make sure that whatever process we have or whatever like scheme we use
Tim Beiko: is both like semantically useful, like we, we know what they're getting out of it, but also not completely independent from from the other parts of the process.
Tim Beiko: so my like, yeah. My again, my proposal, if we just want to track changes, then commits or or commit. Hashes are are kind of nice because you get them for free, and then, if we want to have a much more comprehensive thing. I think it should.
Tim Beiko: it should encompass a bit more.
Tim Beiko: yeah, we. I think it's worth continuing this conversation, I think, and happy to trial something for Glamsterdam as we as we work through the fork, which obviously we would, we would adjust.
Tim Beiko: And
Tim Beiko: we're already at time with this anything else people have to bring up quickly before we wrap up.
Tim Beiko: Okay? Well, oh, yeah, Ben.
Ben Adams: Just the issue. The blob, count Max per transaction that was just raised about.
Ben Adams: So the paired pair Dash related.
Ben Adams: It is, where is it?
Ben Adams: Re. Forward this that Alexia raised.
Tim Beiko: Okay, we're already past time. So let's have people review this. I think.
Marius: Alright, thank you. See you bye.
Gary Schulte: Bye Marius thanks Marius, Hi.
Ameziane Hamlat: And I.